# The BC32 Data Encoding Format
## BCR-0004

**© 2020 Blockchain Commons**

Author: Wolf McNally<br/>
Date: May 2, 2020

---

### Introduction

The [Bech32] checksummed base32 format was introduced to transport segregated witness signatures for Bitcoin. It has several desriable qualities:

* The payload and checksum data use a limited character set compatible with both URI syntax and QR code alphanumeric encoding mode.
* The character set uses the letters A-Z in a case-modal fashion (i.e., one can use all upper case or all lower case but the algorithm rejects mixed-case.)
* The character set is chosen to minimize ambiguity, and the ordering is chosen to minimize the number of pairs of similar characters.
* Built-in error detection.
* Because the character set used are all "word characters", most text editors will select the entire sequence of characters when it is double-clicked.

However, it also has a couple drawbacks when considered for general data encoding:

* The checksum algorithm is suited to a smaller number of bytes.
* The characters allowed for the human readable part ("HRP") conflict with both URI syntax and QR code alphanumeric encoding mode.

### Proposal

This document proposes a new, more general data encoding format *BC32* that is based on Bech32 but makes the following modifications:

* The HRP and numeral `1` divider are no longer included.
* **TODO:** The checksum is enhanced to handle larger payloads.

### Implementations

Current implementations:

* Implemented by `bc32_seed_encode()` and `bc32_seed_decode()` in the Blockchain Commons [bc-bech32](https://github.com/blockchaincommons/bc-bech32) library.
* Implemented as a [Wolfram Language (Mathematica) module accompanying this document](bcr-0004/BC32.nb).

### Test Vectors

| Input | BC32 Encoded |
|---|---|
| "Hello world" (UTF-8) == 48656c6c6f20776f726c64 | fpjkcmr0ypmk7unvvsh4ra4j |
| d934063e82001eec0585ee41ab5d8e4b703a4be1f73aec21e143912c56 | jrvngp37sgqpamq9shhyr26a3e9hqwjtu8mn4mppu9peztzkkr5vuw |

### References

* [Bech32] [BIP-173: Base32 address format for native v0-16 witness outputs](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki)

### Unused References
