# The BC32 Data Encoding Format
## BCR-2020-004

**© 2020 Blockchain Commons**

Authors: Wolf McNally, Christopher Allen<br/>
Date: May 5, 2020

### DEPRECATED

The content below is now deprecated and of historical interest only.

---

### Introduction

The [Bech32] checksummed base32 format was introduced to transport segregated witness signatures for Bitcoin. It has several desirable qualities:

* The payload and checksum data use a limited character set compatible with both URI syntax and QR code alphanumeric encoding mode.
* The character set uses the letters A-Z in a case-modal fashion (i.e., one can use all upper case or all lower case but the algorithm rejects mixed-case.)
* The character set is chosen to minimize ambiguity, and the ordering is chosen to minimize the number of pairs of similar characters.
* Built-in error detection and optional error location for payloads <80 characters.
* Because the character set used are all "word characters", most text editors will select the entire sequence of characters when it is double-clicked.

However, it also has a major drawback when considered for general data encoding:

* The characters allowed for the human readable part ("HRP") conflict with both URI syntax and QR code alphanumeric encoding mode.
* The HRP is not useful to identify a wide variety of general structured data types.

### Proposal

This document proposes a new, more general data encoding format *BC32* that is based on Bech32 but makes the following modifications:

* The HRP and numeral `1` divider are no longer included.
* **TODO:** Checksum parameters are defined to handle error correction and identification for larger payloads.

### Relative Efficiency

The following table compares the relative efficiency of various binary-to-text encoding methods. base32 encoding (and BC32 excluding the checksum) is 12.5% less efficient than base64, but also 12.5% more efficient than hexadecimal. The benefit gained by using only 32 characters is seamless compatibility with both QR code alphanumeric encoding and URI syntax.

| Format | Number of characters | Number of bits per character | Efficiency compared to raw binary |
|---|---|---|---|
| raw binary | 256 | 8.0 | 100% |
| base64 | 64 | 6.0 | 75% |
| base45 (QR Code alphanumeric) | 45 | 5.49185 | 68.65% |
| base32, bech32, BC32 (not including checksum) | 32 | 5.0 | 62.5% |
| hexadecimal | 16 | 4.0 | 50% |

**✳️ Note:** Although it would appear that base32 is always less efficient than base64, this is not the case when encoding a payload for transport in QR codes. Because BC32 uses a character set optimized for the more efficient QR code alphanumeric mode, a payload of 1000 random bytes results in a QR code 13% less dense when the payload is encoded with BC32, compared to the same payload encoded as Base64.

### Implementations

Current implementations:

* Implemented by `bc32_seed_encode()` and `bc32_seed_decode()` in the Blockchain Commons [bc-bech32](https://github.com/blockchaincommons/bc-bech32) library.
* Implemented as a [Wolfram Language (Mathematica) module accompanying this document](bcr-2020-004/BC32.nb).
* Implemented as [bc-bech32](https://github.com/CoboVault/cobo-vault-blockchain-base/tree/master/packages/bc-bech32) on Typescript/javascript

### Test Vectors

| Input | BC32 Encoded |
|---|---|
| "Hello world" (UTF-8) == 48656c6c6f20776f726c64 | fpjkcmr0ypmk7unvvsh4ra4j |
| d934063e82001eec0585ee41ab5d8e4b703a4be1f73aec21e143912c56 | my6qv05zqq0wcpv9aeq6khvwfdcr5jlp7uawcg0pgwgjc4shjm6xu |

### References

* [Bech32] [BIP-173: Base32 address format for native v0-16 witness outputs](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki)

### Unused References
