# UR Type Definition for Shamir Secret Key Recovery (SSKR)

## BCR-0011

**© 2020 Blockchain Commons**

Authors: Wolf McNally, Christopher Allen<br/>
Date: June 19, 2020<br/>
Revised: June 25, 2020

### Introduction

This BCR describes a standard and interoperable implementation of Shamir's secret-sharing (SSS). SSS splits a master secret, such as the master seed S for Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets described in [BIP32], into unique parts which can be distributed among participants. A specified minimum number of parts is required to be supplied in order to reconstruct the original secret. Knowledge of fewer than the required number of parts does not leak information about the master secret.

This document specifies a native CBOR encoding for Shamir Secret Sharing shards, as well as a Uniform Resource [UR] type `crypto-sskr` (CBOR tag #6.309).

### ⚠️ Incompatible with SLIP-39

This specification is based on [SLIP39], developed by SatoshiLabs. The fields of the CBOR structure defined herein are compatible with SLIP-39 and derived using the same methods, but this specification is **NOT** compatible with SLIP-39.

At first glance, [BIP39] and SLIP-39 both appear to be means of converting a binary seed to a set of backup words and back. You might assume you could simply convert a BIP-39 backup to a binary seed, from that binary seed to SLIP-39, and then use the SLIP-39 backup to recover the same wallet as the original BIP-39 backup, but this is **NOT** the case. This is because the SLIP-39 algorithm that SatoshiLabs uses in their Trezor wallet does not derive the master secret in the same way as their BIP-39 algorithm does.

As SLIP-39 is not round-trip compatible with BIP-39, and SLIP-39 is under the control of SatoshiLabs and does not appear to be a fully community-controlled standard, Blockchain Commons is no longer endorsing SLIP-39.

This proposal, SSKR, is an alternative to SLIP-39 that allows round-trips with BIP-39. We want to ensure that the same seed will result in the same derived keys using either BIP-39 or SSKR.

* This issue is being tracked [here](https://github.com/BlockchainCommons/bc-lethekit/issues/38).

It is expected that a common method of conveying SSKR URs will be via QR codes or a forthcoming new method of generating backup words. Therefore, unlike SLIP-39 this specification does not include a method of converting an SSKR UR into a sequence of backup words. The task of specifying a method for converting SSKR shards (or URs more generally) to and from backup words is left to a forthcoming specification.

### CDDL

The following specification is written in Concise Data Definition Language [CDDL].

It is desirable that shards be of minimal size to facilitate their distribution as sequences of bytewords. We therefore pack most the metadata for the shard and the share data itself into a single byte string and express the structure as a CBOR byte string.

The single element of this structure is a byte string whose first five bytes consist of the `data` field below, followed by the `share-value` field.

These size optimizations still allow the encoded structure to be well-formed CBOR, be self-identifying, and contain a checksum (provided by Bytewords).

```
crypto-sskr = bytes
```

Bit fields of `data` field:
```
 6543210 6543210 6543210 6543210 6543210
---------------=====----====----====----
identifier: 15 iteration-exponent: 5
                    group-index: 4
                        group-threshold: 4
                            group-count: 4
                                member-index: 4
                                    member-threshold: 4
```

#### Field descriptions:

The following is adapted from [SLIP39].

* `identifier` (id) is a random 15-bit value which is the same for all shares and is used to verify that the shares belong together; it is also used as salt in the encryption of the master secret.
* `iteration-exponent` (e) indicates the total number of iterations to be used in PBKDF2. The number of iterations is calculated as 10000×(2^e).
* `group-index` (GI) is the x value of the group share.
* `group-threshold` (Gt) indicates how many group shares are needed to reconstruct the master secret. The actual value is encoded as Gt = GT − 1, so a value of 0 indicates that a single group share is needed (GT = 1), a value of 1 indicates that two group shares are needed (GT = 2) etc.
* `group-count` (g) indicates the total number of groups. The actual value is encoded as g = G − 1.
* `member-index` (I) is the x value of the member share in the given group.
* `member-threshold` (t) indicates how many member shares are needed to reconstruct the group share. The actual value is encoded as t = T − 1.
* `share-value` (ps) corresponds to a list of the SSS part's f_k(x) values, 1 ≤ k ≤ n. Each f_k(x) value is encoded as a string of eight bits in big-endian order. The concatenation of these bit strings is the share value. Unlike [SLIP39] this value is not padded.
* Unline [SLIP39], we do not include a checksum at this level, since the Bytewords encoding provides a checksum.

### Example

The data in this example is random. Therefore this example is not an actual test vector.

* In the CBOR diagnostic notation:

```
309(
    h'76220220b86ab8636212aab84200a070975a641972' ; data (5) || share-value (16)
)
```

* Encoded as binary using [CBOR-PLAYGROUND]:

```
D9 0135                                 # tag(309)
   55                                   # bytes(21)
      76220220B86AB8636212AAB84200A070975A641972
```

* As a hex string:

```
d901355576220220b86ab8636212aab84200a070975a641972
```

* As a UR:

```
ur:crypto-sskr/taadecgokocpaocxroimroiaidbgpkrofwaenbjomshtiecfjpfnnykelu
```

* As Bytewords:

```
tuna acid epic gyro keno cusp also crux redo item
redo idea iced brag peck redo flew able numb judo
miss heat idle chef jump fern navy kite luau
```

* Annotated Bytewords:

```
tuna acid epic gyro -- identifies that this is an SSKR share and the length of the data that follows
keno cusp -- same for every share in split
also crux -- same for every share in group
redo item redo idea iced brag peck redo flew able numb judo miss heat idle chef jump
fern navy kite luau -- checksum
```

### References

* [BIP32] [BIP-0032: Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki)
* [BIP39] [BIP-0039: Mnemonic code for generating deterministic keys](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki)
* [SLIP39] [SLIP-0039: Shamir's Secret-Sharing for Mnemonic Codes](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0039.md)
* [CDDL] [RFC8610: Concise Data Definition Language (CDDL): A Notational Convention to Express Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) and JSON Data Structures](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8610)
* [UR] [Uniform Resources (UR)](bcr-0005-ur.md)

---
