# Gordian Envelope Cryptography

## BCR-2023-013

**© 2023 Blockchain Commons**

Authors: Wolf McNally, Christopher Allen<br/>
Date: December 9, 2023<br/>
Revised: December 9, 2023

## Overview

Gordian Envelope can be used to encrypt and sign data. For encryption, Envelope supports both symmetric and public key encryption. Envelope also supports sharding using [SSKR](bcr-2020-011-sskr.md).

## Symmetric Encryption

Gordian Envelope supports industry standard IETF-ChaCha20-Poly1305 symmetric encryption as described in [BCR-2023-004](bcr-2023-004-envelope-symmetric-encryption.md). Using a symmetric `crypto-key` defined in [BCR-2020-001](bcr-2022-001-encrypted-message.md), the Envelope API specifically encrypts the subject of the envelope, transforming it into an instance of `encrypted` (ibid.) and, leaving its assertions unencrypted. For example:

```
"Secret" [
    "assertion1": "value1"
    "assertion2": "value2"
]
```

becomes:

```
ENCRYPTED [
    "assertion1": "value1"
    "assertion2": "value2"
]
```

If the entire contents of an envelope are to be encrypted, it must first be wrapped, so all of its assertions are included:

```
{
    "Secret" [
        "assertion1": "value1"
        "assertion2": "value2"
    ]
}
```

Now the entire contents of the envelope are encrypted:

```
ENCRYPTED
```

Note that in both cases, the digest associated with the envelope does not change, as the `encrypted` message declares the digest of the unencrypted envelope as described in [BCR-2023-004](bcr-2023-004-envelope-symmetric-encryption.md).

Symmetric key encryption is a building block of both the public key encryption and the sharding using SSKR described below.

## Public Key Encryption

A "sealed message" (`crypto-sealed`) as described in [BCR-2023-011](bcr-2023-011-public-key-crypto.md) is a message that has been encrypted to a specific recipient using their public key (`crypto-pubkeys`) (ibid.) in such a way that only the recipient and not even the sender can decrypt it later. Creating a sealed message involves several steps:

1. **Create a Unique Symmetric Key:** A unique symmetric key (the content key) is generated for encrypting the payload.

2. **Ephemeral Sender Key Pair and Encryption:** An ephemeral sender public-private key pair is created. The symmetric key is then encrypted using the recipient's public key through this ephemeral key pair.

3. **Discard the Ephemeral Private Key:** The ephemeral private key is discarded after its one-time use, enhancing security by ensuring that even the sender cannot decrypt the message once it's sent.

Gordian Envelope supports multi-recipient public key encryption by adding one or more `hasRecipient: SealedMessage` assertions to the envelope. Only a single content key is used, but that key is separately encrypted to each recipient's `PublicKeys`, one per recipient. For example, a message encrypted to two recipients would look like this:

```
ENCRYPTED [
    'hasRecipient': SealedMessage
    'hasRecipient': SealedMessage
]
```

As the sealed message gives no indicator of which recipient it is for, a recipient must try to decrypt each sealed message in turn until one succeeds. Once it has the content key, it can decrypt the envelope's subject.

## Signing

A signature (`signature`) (ibid.) supports either [BIP-340 Schnorr](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki) (preferred) or [ECDSA-25519-doublesha256](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/BIP_0137). The signature is generated by signing the digest of the subject envelope. The signature is then added to the envelope as a `signed` assertion. Multiple signers can be supported by adding multiple `signed` assertions:

```
ENCRYPTED [
    'signed': Signature
    'signed': Signature
]
```

The above is an example of encrypt-then-sign. Sign-then-encrypt is also supported, by first adding the `signed` assertion before encrypting the envelope:

```
"Payload" [
    'signed': Signature
]
```

then wrapping the entire envelope:

```
{
    "Payload" [
        'signed': Signature
    ]
}
```

and finally encrypting the entire envelope:

```
ENCRYPTED
```

## Sharding using SSKR

Sharding is a technique for splitting a secret into multiple shares, such that a minimum number of shares are required to reconstruct the secret. SSKR is a standard for sharding secrets, defined in [BCR-2020-011](bcr-2020-011-sskr.md). As with public key encryption, an ephemeral content key can be used to encrypt the payload, and then the content key can be sharded using SSKR. A set of envelopes can each be generated and distributed, each containing a unique `sskrAssertion` containing a share of the content key:

```
ENCRYPTED [
    'sskrShare': SSKRShare
]
```

A minimum number of shares can be used to reconstruct the content key, which can then be used to decrypt the envelope subject.

## Combinations

All of the above techniques can be combined. For example, a message can be signed:

```
"Payload" [
    'signed': Signature
]
```

then wrapped:

```
{
    "Payload" [
        'signed': Signature
    ]
}
```

then encrypted:

```
ENCRYPTED
```

then a content key generated which is used to add a `hasRecipient` assertion:

```
ENCRYPTED [
    'hasRecipient': SealedMessage
]
```

then the content key sharded using SSKR:

```
ENCRYPTED [
    'hasRecipient': SealedMessage
    'sskrShare': SSKRShare
]
```

This results in a set of envelopes, the payload of which can be decrypted by a specific holder of the recipient's private key, or by collecting a quorum of SSKR shares.
